epoch=1 crossentropy(train): nan
epoch=1 crossentropy(validation): nan
epoch=2 crossentropy(train): nan
epoch=2 crossentropy(validation): nan
epoch=3 crossentropy(train): nan
epoch=3 crossentropy(validation): nan
epoch=4 crossentropy(train): nan
epoch=4 crossentropy(validation): nan
epoch=5 crossentropy(train): nan
epoch=5 crossentropy(validation): nan
epoch=6 crossentropy(train): nan
epoch=6 crossentropy(validation): nan
epoch=7 crossentropy(train): nan
epoch=7 crossentropy(validation): nan
epoch=8 crossentropy(train): nan
epoch=8 crossentropy(validation): nan
epoch=9 crossentropy(train): nan
epoch=9 crossentropy(validation): nan
epoch=10 crossentropy(train): nan
epoch=10 crossentropy(validation): nan
epoch=11 crossentropy(train): nan
epoch=11 crossentropy(validation): nan
epoch=12 crossentropy(train): nan
epoch=12 crossentropy(validation): nan
epoch=13 crossentropy(train): nan
epoch=13 crossentropy(validation): nan
epoch=14 crossentropy(train): nan
epoch=14 crossentropy(validation): nan
epoch=15 crossentropy(train): nan
epoch=15 crossentropy(validation): nan
epoch=16 crossentropy(train): nan
epoch=16 crossentropy(validation): nan
epoch=17 crossentropy(train): nan
epoch=17 crossentropy(validation): nan
epoch=18 crossentropy(train): nan
epoch=18 crossentropy(validation): nan
epoch=19 crossentropy(train): nan
epoch=19 crossentropy(validation): nan
epoch=20 crossentropy(train): nan
epoch=20 crossentropy(validation): nan
error(train): 0.9
error(validation): 0.9
